Welcome back.
Let's now learn all about the event loop,
which is the heart of the Node.js architecture.
And this is probably the most important lecture
in this section, so make sure you really understand
everything that I show you during this video.
So, let's get started.
So, here is a diagram similar to the last lecture
so that we know exactly what we're talking about here.
So, we're still in a Node process in the single thread
where the event loop runs, all right?
Now, the first thing that you need
to know is that the event loop is
where all the application code
that is inside callback functions is executed.
So, basically, all code that is not top level code will run
in the event loop.
Some parts might get offloaded to the thread pool
as we saw in the last lecture,
but it's the event loop that takes care of all this.
As I said before, it really is the heart
of the Node architecture.
Okay, now, as I mentioned many times in the first part
of the course, Node.js is all built
around callback functions.
So, functions that are called as soon
as some work is finished some time in the future.
Remember that?
And it works this way because Node
uses an event-triggered architecture,
which is something that we're gonna talk about in one
of the next videos.
But what you need to know for now is
that things like our application
receiving an HTTP request on our server or a timer expiring
or a file finishing to read, all these will emit events
as soon as they are done with their work,
and our event loop will then pick up these events
and call the callback functions
that are associated with each event.
Okay, make sense?
So, again, the event loop receives events
each time something important happens,
and will then call the necessary callbacks
such as we define in our code.
So, in summary, it's usually said
that the event loop does the orchestration,
which simply means that it receives events,
calls their callback functions,
and offloads the more expensive tasks to the thread pool.
Now, how does all this actually work behind the scenes?
In what order are these callbacks executed?
Well, that is what we're gonna find out next.
So, remember, when we start our Node application,
the event loop starts running right away.
Now, the event loop has multiple phases,
and each phase has a callback queue,
which are the callbacks coming from the events
that the event loop receives,
just as we talked about in the last slide.
Now, in some places you will read
that there is only one callback queue or one event queue,
but in fact, as I said, the event loop has many phases
where each phase has its own callback queue.
So, let's now take a look at the four most important phases.
There are one or two other phases
that are used internally by Node,
but these are not that important
and I'm not gonna talk about them.
So, the first phase takes care
of callbacks of expired timers,
for example, from the setTimeout() function.
So, if there are callback functions from timers
that just expired, these are the first ones
to be processed by the event loop.
If a timer expires later during the time when one
of the other phases are being processed,
well, then the callback of that timer will only be called
as soon as the event loop comes back to this first phase.
Make sense?
And it works like this in all four phases.
So, callbacks in each queue are processed one
by one until there are no ones left in the queue,
and only then, the event loop will enter the next phase.
Next up, we have I/O polling and execution of I/O callbacks.
And again, remember that I/O stands for input/output.
So, polling basically means looking for new I/O events
that are ready to be processed
and putting them into the callback queue.
And remember that in the context of a Node application,
I/O means mainly stuff like networking and file access,
and so, it's in this phase where probably 99%
of our code gets executed,
simply because in a typical Node app,
the bulk of what we need to do is related to networking
and also, file accessing.
The next phase is for setImmediate callbacks,
and setImmediate is a special kind of timer
that we can use if we want to process callbacks immediately
after the I/O polling and execution phase,
which can be important in some more advanced use cases.
All right.
And finally, the fourth phase is for close callbacks,
which are, again, not that important for us,
but I put this here anyway for the sake of completeness.
Basically, in this phase, all close events are processed,
for example, for when a web server or a WebSocket shut down.
So, these are the four phases in the event loop,
but besides these four callback queues that we just saw,
there are actually also two other queues,
the nextTick() queue and the other microtasks queue,
which is mainly for resolved promises.
If you're not familiar with promises,
we will talk about them a bit in a later section.
Anyway, if there are any callbacks in one
of these two queues to be processed,
they will be executed right after the current phase
of the event loop finishes instead of waiting
for the entire loop to finish.
Okay?
So, in other words, after each of these four phases,
if there are any callbacks in these two special queues,
they will be executed right away.
Now, for example, imagine that a promise resolves
and returns some data from an API call while the callback
of an expired timer is running.
So, in this case, the promise callback will be executed
right after the one from the timer finishes.
Okay?
And the same logic also applies to the nextTick() queue,
which we didn't talk about yet.
So, basically, process the nextTick() is a function
that we can use when we really, really need
to execute a certain callback
right after the current event loop phase.
It's a bit similar to setImmediate,
with the difference that setImmediate only runs
after the I/O callback phase.
What is similar, though,
is that both are for really advanced use cases,
and we're probably not even gonna need them
throughout this course.
But anyway, I wanted to include this more complex stuff here
as well so that you have the tools
that you need if you really need
to dig deep into Node.js if you want to.
All right, and with that, we actually finished one tick
of the event loop, and a tick is basically just one cycle
in this loop.
So, now it's time to decide whether the loop should continue
to the next tick or if the program should exit.
And how does Node do that?
Well, it's very simple.
Node simply checks whether there are any timers
or I/O tasks that are still running in the background,
and if there aren't any, then it will exit the application.
But if there are any pending timers or I/O tasks,
well, then it will continue running the event loop
and go straight to the next tick.
So, for example, when we're listening
for incoming HTTP requests like we did
in our Node farm project in a previous section,
we were basically running an I/O task,
and that is why the event loop,
and therefore, Node.js, keep running
and keep listening for new HTTP requests coming in
instead of just exiting the application.
Also, when we're writing or reading a file
in the background, that's also an I/O task,
and so, it makes sense that the app doesn't exit
while it's working with that file, right?
Okay, and this is basically what you should know
about the Node.js event loop.
If you need even more detail than this,
well, you can always try to read
the official Node documentation, which should be quite easy
for you to understand at this point now
that you already understand most of the event loop anyway.
And I just wanna emphasize that it's really,
really important for you to correctly understand
the event loop so that you can write your own
performing code and also debug your own code
when something goes wrong in an unexpected way.
And now, just to finish, let's review some
of the stuff we talked about here.
So, in a nutshell, the most important thing
that I want you to understand from this lecture,
and maybe from this entire course,
is that event loop is what makes
asynchronous programming possible in Node.js,
making it the most important feature in Node's design
and making Node.js completely different
from other platforms.
It takes care of all incoming events
and performs orchestration by offloading heavier tasks
into the thread pool, and doing the most simple work itself.
Also, remember that we need the event loop
because in Node.js everything works in one single thread,
and so, you can have thousands or millions
of users accessing the same thread at the same time.
This makes Node so lightweight and scalable,
but at the same time, it comes with the danger
of blocking our single thread,
which would make the entire app slow
or even stop for all your users accessing the app, right?
Now, in other languages like PHP running on
an Apache server, basically, a new thread is created
for each new user, which is way more resource-intensive.
But on the other hand, there is no danger
of blocking, right?
So, that whole model makes it a bit easier
to use PHP for beginners, but of course,
it comes with its own disadvantages,
which I'm not gonna go into at this point.
Anyway, let me again remind you
that it's your responsibility to not block the event loop,
and so here's a couple of guidelines for that.
First off, don't use the sync versions
of functions in the fs, crypto,
or zlib modules in your callback functions, okay?
So, in our first project, we actually did use
the synchronous version, but it was in the top level code,
so outside of any callback.
And since that code runs before the event loop even starts,
well, it's not problem to use the synchronous version there.
Also, and this is probably pretty obviously,
don't perform very complex calculations in the event loop.
So, stuff like crunching millions
of numbers in loops inside of loops, or something like that.
Next, be careful with JSON in very large objects
because at some point, it can start to take a long time
to parse, or to stringify, JSON.
And finally, don't use all too complex regular expressions,
for example, with multiple nested quantifiers
or back references, because again,
they can take longer than expected.
These are, of course, just a couple
of high level guidelines, but they will get you started
on the right path.
Now, there are some potential solutions
to these blocking problems, like manually offloading
to the thread pool or using child processes,
and we might talk about this by the end of the course
or some time in the future, but for now,
it's important that you understand and follow this advice
of really not blocking the event loop.
All right.
Next up, I'm gonna give you a small example
to show you some of the stuff
that we talked about in practice.